JUDY WOODRUFF: Back to
President Trump's comments to
The New York Times yesterday.
The broadsides aimed at top
officials from the Justice
Department raise questions about
the president's
relationship with Attorney
General Jeff Sessions.
We are joined by
Walter Dellinger.
He served in the Clinton
administration as
assistant attorney general
and acting solicitor
general.
He's now in private practice.
And former U.S. Ambassador
Douglas Kmiec, he
served as legal counsel
to Presidents Ronald
Reagan and George H.W. Bush.
He is now a professor of
constitutional law at Pepperdine
University Law School.
And we welcome you both
back to the program.
Walter Dellinger, to you first.
How significant are the
president's criticisms of
top officials at Justice?
WALTER DELLINGER, Former Acting
Solicitor General: Well, I
think they're unprecedented
in their inappropriateness.
A president shouldn't
be commenting on any
particular criminal
investigation, especially
he should not be commenting one
that involves people that are
close to him, potential family
members.
And yet here the president
said that the attorney
general shouldn't have
recused himself and
shouldn't have been appointed
unless he had sort of committed
himself not to recuse, even
though departmental
rules would call for it.
He then criticized the
deputy attorney general
for naming a special
counsel, which was clearly
appropriate.
And, finally, he made it clear
that he thought that the special
counsel shouldn't inquire
into any financial dealings
that are outside of the scope
of the Russian campaign.
All of those seem to be
inappropriate for a president,
unprecedented, and something
that certainly would send
a chill through the entire
Department of Justice.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Douglas Kmiec,
inappropriate and likely to send
a chill through the department?
DOUGLAS KMIEC, Pepperdine
University Law School: I think
everything Walter said is true.
We know of two things as a
result of that interview, one,
that he has a very intelligent
and beautiful granddaughter
who he's very proud of.
And that, I think, will
humanize the president for
people who read his interview.
But we are very troubled by the
nature of how he understands
his role as president and
his ability to intercede into
particular investigations.
You know, Judy, I think he
comes from the business world,
where his perception is where
lawyers are hired because
they're smart and clever and
they can get the best price on
property and the best
title arrangements and
the best closing date,
and all these things
are subject to negotiation.
And what he doesn't realize --
and it becomes plain at every
turn -- is that the Constitution
is designed to separate power,
to specify limits, to make sure
that nobody has the ability
to give favoritism
to their friends.
And this is just something
he just doesn't grasp.
Instead, he has a very
transactional view of the law,
and it's not the view that the
Department of Justice has
to defend, as a matter
of the Constitution.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Walter
Dellinger, given if that's his
understanding of the role of
the Justice Department,
what are the consequences
for the department in
terms of its ability
to do its job?
WALTER DELLINGER: Well, I think,
outside the area of the Russia
investigation, the department
will go forward.
I think the president's
reputation has suffered
enough that his criticism
of Attorney General
Sessions is likely only to
enhance the attorney general's
standing within the department.
You know, I think that, in
terms of this particular
investigation, it will proceed.
You know, Robert Mueller, we
have to remember, is like James
Comey, a lifelong Republican,
12 years as head of the FBI
under two presidents of two
different political parties.
Robert Mueller is known to
law enforcement throughout the
United States and held in the
highest possible regard, so
that -- and I certainly agree
with everything Doug Kmiec
said.
If the president were to make
a move to try to break through
the department and dismiss
Robert Mueller, I think the
organized bar would find it
incumbent upon itself to take
whatever actions they
could in response to that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Doug Kmiec,
at this point, the president
is saying he's not going to
do that.
But he also seemed to send a
shot across the bow in saying
that, if it turns out that Mr.
Mueller is looking into his
own financial dealings, any
financial dealings with Russia,
which may be the case, that he
would give it another thought.
So, what does that mean
for Mr. Mueller and his
ability to go forward?
DOUGLAS KMIEC: Well, I don't
think Mr. Mueller will be
intimidated whatsoever.
As Walter said, he's a straight
shooter, and he is being very
careful and very quiet as
he gathers his
information, as he should.
The concern I have is that
the president, if he thinks
that it's only a very narrow
question of whether there was
a contact with Russia, that
is just simply not plausible,
because the real concern is
that the president somehow has
gotten himself into a difficult
position with a foreign country,
where a foreign country has
some information, perhaps with
this disreputable memo that
talks about terrible practices
that the president allegedly was
involved in, perhaps
something else.
To the extent that there is some
undue influence of a foreign
nation of his decision-making,
it strikes every aspect
of his job, foreign policy
and domestic policy.
And that's just simply
not going to be accepted.
And so what is going to be
the answer if he objects?
I think the answer will be
a referral to the House of
Representatives for removal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For
removal of the president?
WALTER DELLINGER: The
president, if I could just...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Of the president?
WALTER DELLINGER: I think
Doug was saying a referral for
impeachment proceedings, yes.
But you know that every step
he's taking are further elements
of what might well be an
obstruction of justice
against the president.
The very idea that he
would be trying to direct
the special counsel not
to inquire into certain
areas involving the president's
own finances, even though the
president has a free speech
right to do that and can
exercise the power of
his presidency, if he
does so for a corrupt
motive, those can
certainly be elements of
an obstruction of justice.
DOUGLAS KMIEC: I think
that that is right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Go ahead.
DOUGLAS KMIEC: The one thing
we might worry about that the
president might have helped
himself, in an ironic sort of
way, in the interview, is how
profoundly he misunderstands
the law.
In an obstruction of justice
prosecution, an espionage
prosecution, all these things
in Title 18 require bad intent
and specific bad intent.
And President Trump's knowledge
of how the law works is so
rudimentary and so different
than our history, where
Harry Truman was told
he couldn't seize the
steel mills, where Ronald
Reagan was told he couldn't have
a line-item veto unless there
was a constitutional amendment,
where one administration after
another said to the president
of the United States, yes,
you are our chief executive, but
that means you must take care
that the laws are faithfully
executed, not that you take
care that your objectives are
accomplished irregardless of
the law.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I just want
to come back to both of you
again, with less than a minute,
and that is to clarify that
you believe that the job of the
attorney general, the deputy
attorney general, these other
individuals the president is
criticizing, that they can
do their jobs as usual,
that their authority
is not undermined after
these criticisms from
the president, Walter Dellinger?
WALTER DELLINGER: You know,
Judy, I don't, because I don't
think people take criticisms
by Donald Trump the way
they would criticism
with any other president.
I don't think that affects the
attorney general's standing
within the department.
DOUGLAS KMIEC: I agree.
I also think that, as
Walter said, Jeff Sessions,
to the extent that he's
putting his nose down
to the grindstone and getting
down to work and accomplishing
the other -- the vast number
of other tasks that
the department handles,
will be admired by those
people in the Justice
Department, as it should.
I think Jeff Sessions
made a very important...
(CROSSTALK)
WALTER DELLINGER: You know,
I think he shouldn't...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Go ahead.
DOUGLAS KMIEC: Go ahead, Walter.
WALTER DELLINGER: I was
saying, Doug, I think
he shouldn't resign.
I think he shouldn't resign,
because that's exactly what
the president wants him to do,
so he can install some
non-recused loyalist
in the department.
DOUGLAS KMIEC: Exactly right.
And Jeff Sessions, however
awkward it would be to continue
his service, is doing a service
to maintain the institution
of the Department of Justice.
And that is what's important.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Douglas
Kmiec, Walter Dellinger,
we thank you both.